the appearance of the Faraday speaks
story on the front page in the New York
Times today is an interesting milestone
in the gradual awakening of the
mainstream press of the world outside of
YouTube the awakening to the extent to
which politics on this platform politics
on YouTube are real politics that really
matter that have real consequences for
people not just huge numbers of people
but also the depth of the influence the
meaning that this has in people's lives
in contrast other types of forums and
other types of formats for political
discourse and speech that frankly the
mainstream media treats as if they're
much more important when they're not so
to throw two contrasting examples quite
a few inches of newspaper or headlines
have been given to a protest in
California involving a few dozen vegans
where they went and protested at a duck
Factory okay so that's an event that
involves a few dozen people maybe 100
people during a couple of hours and
we're really no words of any meaning or
depth or change from either side you
know people show slogans at a protest
people demonstrate if very limited sense
of the word there's also a lot of press
coverage for a current event being
hosted by turning-point USA it's
something like Turning Point USA Young
Women's Leadership Conference and that
event there boasted absolutely boasting
about having 1,400 people attended the
audience now aside from the fact that
both these numbers whether it's 100
people at a protest in real life at a
demonstration or 1,400 people in a
rented venue standing the audience all
those numbers are tiny even by YouTube
channel standards right you wouldn't be
considered a successful YouTube channel
if you have only 1400 viewers in a video
and yet by the way this video you're
watching right now is um
to get more than 1400 yrs I don't
consider myself successful hmm but think
about how shallow and really meaningless
the form of engagement with politics is
for somebody at a protest chanting a
slogan or for somebody standing in the
audience participating in that very
limited way that the members of the
audience will participate at Turning
Point USA so said there's many times on
this channel but if you think about the
decade in the 1960s famous for political
radicalism and political activism it's
how it's how it's remembered rightly or
wrongly how did my own parents get drawn
into extremism it was through incredibly
shallow interactions with political
organizations interactions that could be
as simple as someone handing you a
pamphlet and before the Internet you had
no ability to Google the people in that
pamphlet you no ability to find out more
about their background or what they
represented politically you could go to
a library we could if there were books
cited or reference in the pathway you
can find a little bit more but to a
ridiculous extent in the decade of the
1960's people put their faith in
individual leaders on the basis of a
very shallow interaction at a protest in
person at a demonstration or hearing a
speech they delivered to a crowd on the
basis of a pamphlet a short essay
writing of this kind
there was no moving beyond that that
shallow facade politically so both of my
parents they were not moderate
communists they became absolute crazy
extremists and it destroyed their lives
and it destroyed other people's lives
and keeping it all the way real for
probably the first 15 years of my life
it destroyed my life also it had a lot
of really negative impacts on me and of
course as I was growing up and
questioning my parents beliefs even just
their assumptions about the world put it
that way
it was often amazing to me how facile
that were even compared to kind of the
level of fact-checking that I was going
through as a teenager and figuring out
how the
world worked how economics worked how
you know claims about what was going on
in the world - and left and right were
different and they did you guys end up
Oh what was the what was the path of
what was the downward spiral that led
them to their you know political
extremism well in a lot of ways the
portrait that paints is much darker and
more dangerous than the portrait that
Caleb paints that Faraday speaks paints
that the guy covered in this New York
Times article there's actually a lot
more hope for the future in the fact
that now you have thousands and tens of
thousands of people engaging with
content and engaging with one another in
a meaningful way over hours and hours
and hours and where they're rapidly able
to find it oh well you know that this
person on YouTube this is their view on
this issue then I can google and find
out what's their view by contrast on
this other issue we can interrogate the
sources even if it's just as a viewer
but obviously Caleb's experience or
Faraday's experience um his experience
isn't limited purely to being a passive
viewer it also involves you know
text-based interaction and discussion
through live chat and forums like
discord or what have you know one of the
unfortunate things about this New York
Times article is that the journalists
analysis of the problem is much less
interesting at much less intelligence
than Caleb's analysis which you can find
on his own YouTube channel
katelyn points are quite a number of
interesting things including his
proposal that one of the one of the
crucial variables here is the extent to
which people like himself were listening
to this content while playing video
games that they were engaging in
so-called online debates while playing
video games that it's for him it was a
very strange mix of the passive and the
active he talks about the dopamine
receptors the sense of enjoyment the
sense of entertainment - this brings
I think he has some really interesting
insights and analysis there that you
will not find in this New York Times
article at all and again that's very
different from the crowd attending that
the conference hosted by turning-points
USA or the small number of demonstrators
participating in a vegan you know vegan
riot but it's helping chuffing up and
you know protesting at a slaughterhouse
or something the fact that this is a
political speech political posturing and
the formation of moral opinions the you
know expressing one's own sense of
ethical identity and ethical superiority
over other that this becomes for people
a kind of entertainment supplemental to
video games that it's thin these are
things they listen to while at least
half distracted or half preoccupied with
this very self-indulgence very very
highly stimulative you know visually
very stimulating form of entertainment
and they're not even side by side one is
sort one form of entertainment is kind
of embedded in the other and I noticed
that you know a part of the fact that
the listeners in the audience may be
playing video games while they're doing
this there were many political
commentary channels now where what
they're showing on screen is the
commentator playing video games while
talking about this this is a very
strange and interesting aspect that
certainly didn't exist in any other
period of political science and again I
like what Faraday says about it I don't
like the fact that New York Times gives
this you know if you were to ask what
does this political leader mean to you
almost nobody is gonna say oh he's
meaningful and important to me because
he entertains me while I'm playing video
games but that is very literally the
relationship of leader to follower that
people in this audience you know get get
drawn into and that's whether it's left
wing right wing or in the middle so is
there some comparison to the role of
American radio talk-show hosts in the
Golden Age of people driving to work
while listening to radio I mean I often
wondered with something like Rush
Limbaugh Rush Limbaugh was a right-wing
radio personality would anyone have
really listened to this or taking it
seriously or respected this guy's
opinions if they were really paying
attention to what this radio talk-show
said but people would listen to this
type of political speech on radio
because it was it was really all
political posturing and so they would
listen to it while driving their cars
had already put the audience in a
somewhat different relationship to the
authority of the of the person speaking
in some ways more passive and in some
ways more active perhaps the category of
political commentary on youtube that
caleb is responding to in this new york
times article it's striking to me that
almost none of these people are actually
engaged in charity work or actually
engaged in humanitarian work are
actually involved in efforts to make the
world a better place and they're
definitely not involved in activism in
that sense of the word there are engaged
in activism in a different sense because
no doubt engaging in conversations here
on YouTube it is activism in one sense
of the word somebody like Lauren
southern is a surreal and instructive
example Lauren southern her first issue
made her a little bit famous was her
defiance against feminist street
protests but you can ask the question
and I think nobody does ask this
question what what is Lauren southern
trying to accomplish does Lauren
southern actually want
to help women does Lauren Southern
actually want to help feminists like is
Lauren southern actually trying to help
for example women in Saudi Arabia a
society that really is oppressive
impressive woman or she actually
interested in accomplishing something
positive for feminists in the western
court you know whatever that would be is
hard to imagine Laurens haven't moved on
to her final work as a as a YouTube
filmmaker before she decided to go back
to university and try something else
with their career was this really
bizarre film series about white farm
owners in South Africa I think you know
there's no way you can look at this
corpus of work she created and think
that she was sincerely involved in an
attempt to help farmers these are farm
owners these are not the poor and
landless farm workers but it's not
conceivable that what she's doing is
actually part of a humanitarian effort
or charitable effort to help farmers in
South Africa no I say this as someone
who has experience with trying to help
farmers in a poverty-stricken country in
Southeast Asia in Laos I am NOT saying
my efforts had any positive outcomes in
fact I could talk about my experience of
charity work entirely in terms of the
negative outcomes that but nevertheless
there's something very meaningful and
educational and instructive
instructional for me there's
instructional value for me in my going
out and living with rice farmers in a
poverty-stricken part of the world and
my doing the research and my learning
their language and learning about wealth
and poverty and you know the role of
government regulation and who gets to
own the land and you know who's cutting
down the forests and why and
deforestation and ecological problems
and farming and you know there's a whole
fascinating little demi-monde about
agricultural poverty and the emergence
of people out of poverty through
agriculture people get rich through
agriculture and deforestation all that
stuff too
you know my engagement with that was
necessarily okay put it this way what
Lauren southern does is a lot more like
being a movie star and is a lot less
like humanitarian work or even
humanitarian research what she's done is
created a kind of semi-fictional semi
documentary movie in which she gets to
play the starring role rather than being
sincerely engaged in actually helping
people on humanitarian basis or tried to
learn things that teach this to audience
on a research basis that is very very
different from my experience again I was
gonna use the word humbling I went into
that it was already humble to begin with
before I got out in those rice farms you
know it's but certainly for someone like
Lauren southern it would be very
humbling for her to go out and and have
those experiences and yeah it's a topic
for another video but obviously there's
a contrast here to my experience with
veganism as a social political movement
to how humbling that is or how pathetic
that is I could I could say something in
parallel here so the New York Times
coverage of Faraday speaks of Caleb's
story it is an interesting milestone in
terms of the world outside YouTube
recognizing the extent to which YouTube
politics are real politics they really
matter
they have really deep impact on people's
lives and it's a large number of people
especially compared to the number of
people who participate in protests
street protests or rallies like you know
turning-point USA rally where people are
attending at a conference center or even
at a stadium it's a large number people
and it's tremendous depth and durability
of engagement many many hours of
listening and speaking in a way that
those other types of political forums
you know they can't possibly compete
with YouTube in that sense and one
reaction to that depth and magnitude of
importance of what YouTube is and when
it can be politically I think what it
neva tably will be politically whether
it's YouTube
or another website that competes with
YouTube there's nothing special about
YouTube some other video video sharing
website could start to take on the role
on future at the very end of this
article the journalist suggests that
caleb was doing something wrong in
jumping out of a right-wing YouTube
rabbit hole quote only to jump into a
left-wing YouTube rabbit hole close
quote the journalist asked if Farraday
would consider cutting back on his video
intake altogether and rebuilding some of
his offline relationships quote he
hesitated and looked slightly confused
for all of its problems he said YouTube
is still where political battles are
fought and won leaving the platform
would essentially mean abandoning the
debate close quote
so what the journalist is trying to do
here is present you with an entirely
false argument that the grass is greener
on the other side of the hill and it's
not people do this to me all the time
when I talk about vegan politics within
YouTube and I'm taking it really
seriously it's saying look guys what
happened here on YouTube in the last
five years the veganism really matters
and some people want to react to that by
just saying no no no what happened on V
you what happened on YouTube that
doesn't matter at all because the real
politics the other side of the hill the
grass is greener on the other side of
the hill there's some other political
world whether they imagine that being in
university classrooms or just people
standing on street corners holding up a
sign and handing out pamphlets doing
these kinds of protests that that's the
real political sphere which is
supposedly so much more meaningful and
involves so many more people than
YouTube and that is 180 degrees wrong
people standing on street corners it's a
small number of people it's a very
shallow form of engagement it's
relatively meaningless and what we have
going on here on YouTube is deep and
meaningful and durable and real and it
involves people getting to know one
another building up relationships of
trust and in some cases relationships of
doubt and distrust learning new things
sharing what they've learned yes leading
one another astray but also ultimately
becoming better people and
that is much more meaningful and much
more important than any experience you
can have at a street protest or
attending an organized political
convention or rally YouTube politics are
real politics and this is part of the
slow and inexorable waking up of the
mainstream media to that fact